---
title: Testing Checklist
---
A testing checklist/front-end guide I wrote recently as part of our internal development guidelines.

--

This testing checklist is more of a guide to things you should be doing when launching a site. It has been written using a range of sources:

- [Re-launching The Ultimate Website Launch Checklist](http://www.boxuk.com/blog/relaunching-the-ultimate-website-launch-checklist/)
- [Website Launch Checklist: 25 Things to Test Before Your Site Goes Live](http://searchenginewatch.com/article/2287002/Website-Launch-Checklist-25-Things-to-Test-Before-Your-Site-Goes-Live)
- [The Ultimate Testing Checklist](http://www.sitepoint.com/ultimate-testing-checklist/)

### SEO
- Make sure that all page `<title>` tags are descriptive and the CMS is implemented so the user can change these.
- Meta descriptions should also be included in the CMS.
- Meta keywords are now irrelevant for new webpage and do not need to be added.
- XML Sitemap should be generated when all site content has been decided and pages created. This should be submitted to our [Google Webmaster](https://www.google.com/webmasters/tools/home?hl=en) tools and linked to in a robots.txt file. (please see the Happy Giraffe front end toolkit for an example)
- Google Analytics should be included on the site only on the production server.
- If re-designing a sites URL structure 301 redirects should be set in the `.htaccess` file to re-direct the old sites URLS to most relevant pages on the new site. This is _extremely_ important for passing on Google Ranking to the new URLS.
- Redirect all requests to www.domain.com to domain.com. This can be done in the `.htaccess` file (please see the Happy Giraffe front end toolkit for an example)
- Make sure the URL’s generated by the CMS are clean and user friendly. Avoid using special characters and underscores as word separators. Underscores aren’t recognized as spaces by search engines so use hyphens whenever possible. Remove the index.php string from URLS when using a CMS.
- If the site has a blog or news section include a link to the RSS feed in the head tag. (please see the Happy Giraffe front end toolkit for an example)
- Ensure that headers are used correctly and only one `<h1>` exists on each page. For a solution to the styling of semantic headings please read the following blog post on [a modular approach to CSS typography](http://thesassway.com/advanced/modular-css-typography).

### Devices

###### Links to phone numbers and email address
Check that these can be used to call the number on mobile devices and that email links open in an email client.

###### Orientation
Check that the site responds and shows correctly in both aspects.

###### Media
Check that all media — this includes images, video and embedded media objects — loads and displays correctly.

###### Zooming
Make sure users can zoom into content areas for accessibility reasons.

###### Interactive components
Things like carousels should be usable with touch interfaces for ease of use.

###### Links areas
Any link element whether this be a button or image should be of a size large enough to be easily clickable when using a touch device. If in doubt, bigger is better!

### General

###### Print stylesheet
A print stylesheet should be utilized to give the user a stripped down content only version of the site. Common things to hide would be navigation/footer/header/quick links. For more info on creating a print stylesheet please read:

- [Printing The Web: Solutions and Techniques](http://www.smashingmagazine.com/2007/02/21/printing-the-web-solutions-and-techniques/)
- [A List Apart: Going to print](http://www.alistapart.com/articles/goingtoprint/)

###### Favicon
Make sure that a favicon is present and if possible multiple versions that have been optimized for a range of devices. The following [favicon generator](http://realfavicongenerator.net/) can be used.

###### Fonts
- Check that fonts appear to be in the correct face and that weights are loading correctly.
- Check font sizes look correct.

###### Colour Contrast
- Check that colours used can be distinguished on a multitude of different screens.
- Check the site in black and white to focus on contrast
- Use a colorblind checker to see how colorblind users might see the site

###### Check error pages
Check that there is a 404 page and it displays helpful information. This should include a link back to the home page or suggested content.

###### Test all links, including navigation
- Ensure all links are working and to their correct locations
- Ensure links to phone numbers and email address’s are functional and on mobile devices call the correct number.
- Ensure that navigation works when using a touch device, this means avoiding or replacing hover drop down menus. Also ensure that the area for the link is large enough that users are clear on the navigation option they have selected.

###### Test the search feature
Ensure that the site search functions correctly, and that search results are accurate and helpful.

###### Test forms
- Check that the forms error when fields aren’t filled out that are required.
- Check that the forms validation is correctly working. This should be documented by the developer that built the form.
- Ensure that all error messages are clear and informative.
- Check that the success message is clear and informative and wherever possible allows the user to carry on browsing the site from where they filled out the form. If this isn’t possible then make sure to include links to popular content.


### Accessibility

###### HTML
Check all pages for small sites or a selection of pages for large sites against the [W3C HTML validation tester](http://validator.w3.org/). Wherever possible please ensure that all errors are resolved. If an error cannot be resolved then document why it errors and why it is acceptable for this to stop the page being compliant.

###### CSS
Check your CSS file against the [W3C CSS validation tester](http://jigsaw.w3.org/css-validator/)

###### JS
Check that there are no compile errors in your JS files

###### Voice or text-only browser
Browse the site in a text-only browser and using a screen reader. (find links) JAWS

###### Javascript disabled
Check that all of the sites content is accessible and readable with Javascript disabled. If there are certain components of the site that require JS to be enabled to function this needs to be documented and wherever possible an alternative solution should be implemented.

###### Images
- View the site without Images to make sure the key messages are still displayed. It is also paramount that the site can be navigated without the need for images. This can be done in Chrome by installing [Web Developer tools](https://chrome.google.com/webstore/detail/web-developer/bfbameneiokkgbdmiekhjnmfkcnldhhm) add-on (this is different from the native dev tools)
- All contextual images should have alt tags that describe the image, they shouldn’t be duplicated or simply “image”.
- All design only images, for instance ones used to accompany navigation, should not have alt tags so that text-only browsers and voice browser will ignore them.

### Performance
Resources:
[Yahoo Performance rules](http://developer.yahoo.com/performance/rules.html)

###### Page weight
- Check that your agreed performance budget is met on every page. This can be done using Chrome dev tools in the Network tab. It will tell you the weight of the page you have just downloaded.

###### Images
- Check that no images are more than 200KB in size.
- Check that images are being served at different sizes optimised for the devices that is being used to view them.
- If there are multiple images being downloaded on a page check to see if a lazy load solution could be used to speed up initial page download.
- Wherever possible use SVG’s over other image formats
- Check that all images have been run through an optimizer
- Ensure that the image has been saved in the most appropriate format. Vector based graphics can be saved as SVG. Images with transparent backgrounds should be saved as PNG’s. Bitmap images like photos should be saved as JPEG’s.
- For small images that are going to be used on every page you can inline the image using a data URI in your CSS file. This will save the browser a request.

These can be optimised using tools like [ImageOptim](http://imageoptim.com/) or a grunt task like [grunt-contrib-imagemin](https://github.com/gruntjs/grunt-contrib-imagemin). (For a sample Gruntfile check out the Happy Giraffe front-end toolkit)

Images should be served in different sizes depending on device screen size. To help with this you can use [Picturefill](https://github.com/scottjehl/picturefill) that switches the image src depending on the screen width.

Lazyloading images can help to get the DOM loaded quicker by only loading images when they enter the viewport. A popular method of doing this is by using [Unveil.js](https://github.com/luis-almeida/unveil).

###### Concatenate assets
- Ensure you aren’t making more browser requests than necessary. JS files should be concatenated or inlined (if file is small) (FIND LINK TO PRO’s & CON’s OF INLINING JS)
- Ensure that you are not using `@import` in your CSS files. All CSS should be included in one file.

###### Asynchronous Javascript
Whenever possible you should load all javascript files asynchronously.

This can be done by adding the attribute async to your javascript tags. Be careful using this for javascript that needs to be loaded before the DOM loads.
(i.e `<script src=“script.js" async></script>`)

###### Optimise CSS
- Try to take out un-used CSS selectors, this is best done manually as some automated processors don’t take into account selectors used on certain pages of hidden elements.
- Never use ID’s for styling
- Ensure that long selectors are at a minimum. You should ideally never use long selectors (many descendant selectors) and should only be acceptable when the use of a CMS restricts you from added classes (i.e list items generated for navigation).

```
<!-- Bad -->
header nav ul li a {...}

<!-- Good -->
.primary-link {...}
```

###### Compression
Ensure that compression is enabled for all assets possible in the `.htaccess` file (example of this in Happy Giraffe front end toolkit)

###### Caching
Ensure that static assets are cached using the `.htaccess`. Be smart when choosing your expire times. If the site is going through a lot of changes then you will need to reduce the times on things like css and javascript. You should ideally make use of [cache busting]() for your css and js files.
